.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Richard Braakman and Christian Schwarz
.\"
.\" This manual page is free software.  It is distributed under the
.\" terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your
.\" option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This manual page is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this manual page; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301
.\" USA
.\"
.TH LINTIAN-INFO 1 "August 16, 2006" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.if n .ad l
.nh

.SH NAME
lintian-info \- give detailed information about Lintian's error tags

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lintian-info
.RI [ log-file ... ]
\&...

.B lintian-info \-\-tags
.I tag
\&...

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.B lintian-info
command parses the output of the
.B lintian
command and gives verbose information about the listed Lintian error
tags, parses a Lintian override file and gives verbose information about
the tags included, or (if given the
.BR \-t " or " \-\-tags
option) explains a given tag or tags.
.sp
If no log-file is specified on the command line, this command expects
its input on stdin. Thus, the output of
.B lintian
can either be piped through
.B lintian-info
or a log file produced by
.B lintian
can be processed with this command.  (Note, thought, that the
.B lintian
command has a command line option
.B \-i
to display the same results as
.BR lintian-info ,
so you will not normally need to pipe the output of
.B lintian
into this command.)

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-annotate
Read from standard input or any files specified on the command line and
search the input for lines formatted like Lintian override entries.  For
each one that was found, display verbose information about that tag.

.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.

.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-tags
Rather than treating them as log file names, treat any command-line
options as tag names and display the descriptions of each tag.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.PP
If
.BR \-t " or " \-\-tags
was given and one or more of the tags specified were unknown, this command
returns the exit code 1.  Otherwise, it always returns with exit code 0.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lintian (1)

.SH AUTHORS
Richard Braakman <dark@xs4all.nl>
.br
Christian Schwarz <schwarz@monet.m.isar.de>
