# Copyright (C) Axel Beckert <abe@debian.org>
#
# This manual page is free software.  It is distributed under the
# terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
# Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your
# option) any later version.
#
# This manual page is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this manual page; if not, write to the Free Software
# Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301
# USA
#

=head1 NAME

lintian-migrate-overrides-to-pointed-hints - Convert lintian overrides to new pointed hints syntax

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<lintian-migrate-overrides-to-pointed-hints> [-i|--inline|--no-inline] [--compat|-c|-*]

It needs to be called inside an unpacked Debian source package.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Felix Lechner did a lot of work to standardise the syntax of Lintian
tags to make the output, especially file names and line numbers better
parseable for downstream consumption, e.g. the
L<https://lintian.debian.org/> website, L<lintian-brush(1)>.

L<https://lintian.debian.org/> uses this to create direct deep links
to the right line number in the right file on
L<https://sources.debian.org/> as requested in
L<https://bugs.debian.org/743226>.

This unfortunately has the downside that many overrides from before
these changes no more match and need to be updated. Because this is a
rather tedious work, this helper script has been written. See
L<https://bugs.debian.org/1007002> for the according discussion.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<lintian-migrate-overrides-to-pointed-hints> has no parameters and
knows only a few options:

=over 4

=item B<--inline>, B<-i>

Edit lintian override files directly ("inline") instead of printing
the updated files to STDOUT.

This is the default if called inside a packaging git repository,
i.e. if a directory called B<.git> exists at the same level as the
B<debian> directory.

=item B<--no-inline>

Disable inline editing of lintian override files even if called inside
a git repository.

=item B<--compat>, B<-c>, B<-*>

Output asterisk wildcards (C<*>) instead of brackets to make the
lintian override backwards compatible with Lintian in Debian 11
Bullseye, at least of the order of parameters hasn't changed.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<https://bugs.debian.org/743226>, L<https://bugs.debian.org/1007002>,
L<lintian>

=head1 AUTHORS

Axel Beckert <abe@debian.org>, Jakub Wilk <jwilk@debian.org>

Please use the email address <lintian-maint@debian.org> for
comments related to this script.

Bug reports should be sent to the Debian Bug Tracking System and filed
against the package B<lintian>.

=cut
