# Copyright © 2015 Niels Thykier
#
# This manual page is free software.  It is distributed under the
# terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
# Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your
# option) any later version.
#
# This manual page is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this manual page; if not, write to the Free Software
# Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301
# USA
#

=head1 NAME

spellintian - simple spellchecker based on Lintian's data files

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<spellintian> [B<--picky>] [I<text-file>...]


=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<spellintian> command parses one or more text files for spelling
mistakes.  It uses the same spellcheck algorithm and data set as
B<lintian>.

If no file is specified on the command line, this command expects
its input on stdin.


=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--picky>

Also use the "picky" data set on top of the regular spelling data set.
The "picky" data set also includes a lot of capitalization related
rules (like spelling "Debian" with an uppercase "D").

Note however that these checks can have false positives.  As an
example, consider the following those uses of Python "the python
binary" (e.g. /usr/bin/python) and "the Python language".  The
B<--picky> option will unconditionally flag the use of "python" in the
first case as bad despite being correct.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Display usage information and exit.

=item B<--version>

Print a version banner and exit.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<lintian(1)>

=head1 AUTHORS

Niels Thykier <niels@thykier.net> (wrote the manpage)

Jakub Wilk <jwilk@jwilk.net> (wrote the program)

=cut

