# This file is generated from private/refresh-debhelper-data.
# It was generated on 2020-11-01 03:16
#
# If the script generates an insufficient/incorrect value for a
# single item, please have a look at dh_commands-manual.
#

dh_acc=dh-acc
dh_ada_library=dh-ada-library
dh_apache2=apache2-dev
dh_apparmor=dh-apparmor
dh_aspell-simple=dictionaries-common-dev
dh_auto_build=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_auto_build_nant=cli-common-dev
dh_auto_clean=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_auto_clean_nant=cli-common-dev
dh_auto_configure=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_auto_install=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_auto_test=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_autoreconf=dh-autoreconf
dh_autoreconf_clean=dh-autoreconf
dh_autotools-dev_restoreconfig=autotools-dev
dh_autotools-dev_updateconfig=autotools-dev
dh_bash-completion=bash-completion
dh_bugfiles=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_builddeb=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_buildinfo=dh-buildinfo
dh_clean=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_clideps=cli-common-dev
dh_clifixperms=cli-common-dev
dh_cligacpolicy=cli-common-dev
dh_clistrip=cli-common-dev
dh_cmake_install=dh-cmake
dh_cme_upgrade=cme
dh_compress=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_configpackage=config-package-dev
dh_consoledata=dh-consoledata
dh_cpack_generate=dh-cmake
dh_cpack_install=dh-cmake
dh_cpack_substvars=dh-cmake
dh_ctest_build=dh-cmake
dh_ctest_clean=dh-cmake
dh_ctest_configure=dh-cmake
dh_ctest_start=dh-cmake
dh_ctest_submit=dh-cmake
dh_ctest_test=dh-cmake
dh_ctest_update=dh-cmake
dh_di_kernel_gencontrol=dh-di
dh_di_kernel_install=dh-di
dh_di_numbers=dh-di
dh_dist_zilla_origtar=dh-dist-zilla
dh_dkms=dkms
dh_doxygen=doxygen
dh_dpatch_patch=dpatch
dh_dpatch_unpatch=dpatch
dh_dwz=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_dzil_build=dh-dist-zilla
dh_dzil_clean=dh-dist-zilla
dh_elpa=dh-elpa
dh_elpa_test=dh-elpa
dh_fixperms=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_fortran_mod=dh-fortran-mod
dh_gconf=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_gencontrol=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_germinate_clean=germinate
dh_germinate_metapackage=germinate
dh_girepository=gobject-introspection
dh_gnome=gnome-pkg-tools
dh_gnome_clean=gnome-pkg-tools
dh_gnustep=gnustep-make
dh_golang=dh-golang
dh_golang_autopkgtest=dh-golang
dh_gstscancodecs=libgstreamer1.0-dev
dh_haskell_blurbs=haskell-devscripts-minimal
dh_haskell_depends=haskell-devscripts-minimal
dh_haskell_extra_depends=haskell-devscripts-minimal
dh_haskell_provides=haskell-devscripts-minimal
dh_haskell_shlibdeps=haskell-devscripts-minimal
dh_icons=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_install=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installalternatives=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installcatalogs=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installchangelogs=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installcliframework=cli-common-dev
dh_installcligac=cli-common-dev
dh_installcron=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installdeb=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installdebconf=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installdirs=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installdocs=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installemacsen=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installexamples=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installgsettings=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installifupdown=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installinfo=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installinit=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installinitramfs=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installkpatches=dh-kpatches
dh_installlogcheck=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installlogrotate=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installman=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installmanpages=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installmenu=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installmime=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installmodules=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installpam=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installppp=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installsystemd=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installsystemduser=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installtex=tex-common
dh_installtmpfiles=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installudev=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installwm=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installxfonts=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_installxmlcatalogs=xml-core
dh_installxsp=dh-xsp
dh_installyorick=yorick-dev
dh_kodiaddon_depends=kodi-addons-dev
dh_libva=libva-dev
dh_link=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_linktree=dh-linktree
dh_lintian=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_lisp=dh-lisp
dh_listpackages=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_lua=dh-lua
dh_make=dh-make
dh_make_pgxs=postgresql-server-dev-all
dh_makeclilibs=cli-common-dev
dh_makefont=dh-make
dh_makeshlibs=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_md5sums=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_missing=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_mkdocs=mkdocs
dh_movefiles=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_movelibkdeinit=pkg-kde-tools
dh_numpy3=python3-numpy
dh_ocaml=dh-ocaml
dh_ocamlclean=dh-ocaml
dh_ocamldoc=dh-ocaml
dh_ocamlinit=dh-ocaml
dh_octave_changelogs=dh-octave
dh_octave_check=dh-octave-autopkgtest
dh_octave_clean=dh-octave
dh_octave_examples=dh-octave
dh_octave_make=dh-octave
dh_octave_substvar=dh-octave
dh_octave_version=dh-octave
dh_pdl=pdl
dh_perl6_depsfile=dh-perl6
dh_perl6_maintscript=dh-perl6
dh_perl6_test=dh-perl6
dh_perl=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_perl_dbi=libdbi-perl
dh_perl_imager=libimager-perl
dh_perl_openssl=perl-openssl-defaults
dh_pgxs_test=postgresql-server-dev-all
dh_php=dh-php
dh_phpcomposer=pkg-php-tools
dh_phppear=pkg-php-tools
dh_pidgin=pidgin-dev
dh_ppp=ppp-dev
dh_prep=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_pyppd=pyppd
dh_pypy=dh-python
dh_python-ply=python-ply
dh_python2=dh-python
dh_python3-ply=python3-ply
dh_python3=dh-python
dh_qmlcdeps=pkg-kde-tools
dh_quilt_patch=quilt
dh_quilt_unpatch=quilt
dh_rebar=dh-rebar
dh_ruby=gem2deb
dh_ruby_fixdepends=gem2deb
dh_ruby_fixdocs=gem2deb
dh_runit=dh-runit
dh_sameversiondep=pkg-kde-tools
dh_scour=scour
dh_shlibdeps=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_sip3=python3-sip-dev
dh_sodeps=pkg-kde-tools
dh_sphinxdoc=sphinx-common
dh_strip=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_strip_nondeterminism=dh-strip-nondeterminism
dh_systemd_enable=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_systemd_start=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_sysuser=dh-sysuser
dh_testdir=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_testroot=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_ucf=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_update_autotools_config=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_usrlocal=debhelper | debhelper-compat
dh_uwsgi=uwsgi-dev
dh_vagrant_plugin=vagrant
dh_vdrplugin_depends=vdr-dev
dh_vdrplugin_enable=vdr-dev
dh_vignette=dh-r
dh_vim-addon=dh-vim-addon
dh_virtualenv=dh-virtualenv
dh_webext=mozilla-devscripts
dh_xine=libxine2-dev
dh_xsf_substvars=xserver-xorg-dev
dh_xul-ext=mozilla-devscripts
dh_zathura=zathura-dev
